# EelgrassEpifaunaDisease

Data and code to support manuscript titled "Seagrass wasting disease risk and intensity increase with invertebrate grazing across the northeastern Pacific"

**Authors:** Lillian R Aoki, Carmen Ritter, Deanna S. Beatty, Lia K. Domke, Ginny L. Eckert, Olivia J. Graham, Carla P. Gomes, Collin Gross, Timothy L. Hawthorne, Eliza Heery, Margot Hessing-Lewis, Kevin Hovel, Karl Koehler, Zachary L. Monteith, Ryan S. Mueller, Angeleen M. Olson, Carolyn Prentice, Brendan Rappazzo, John J. Stachowicz, Fiona Tomas, Bo Yang, C. Drew Harvell, J. Emmett Duffy 

**Abstract:** Disease is a key driver of community and ecosystem structure, especially when it strikes foundation species. In the widespread marine foundation species eelgrass (*Zostera marina*), outbreaks of wasting disease have caused large-scale meadow collapse in the past, and the causative pathogen, *Labyrinthula zosterae*, is commonly found in meadows globally. Research to date has mainly focused on environmental drivers of eelgrass wasting disease, such as salinity and temperature, but there is increasing evidence from other systems that biotic interactions such as herbivory can facilitate plant disease. How biotic interactions influence seagrass wasting disease in the field is unknown but is potentially important for understanding dynamics of this globally valuable and declining habitat. Here, we investigated links between epifaunal grazers and seagrass wasting disease using a latitudinal field study across 32 eelgrass meadows distributed from southeastern Alaska to southern California. From 2019-2021, we conducted annual surveys to assess eelgrass shoot density, morphology, epifauna community, and the prevalence and intensity of wasting disease infections. We integrated field data with satellite measurements of sea surface temperature and used structural equation modeling to test for the magnitude and direction of possible drivers of disease. Our results show that grazing by small invertebrates was associated with a 29% increase in wasting disease infections and that both the incidence and intensity of disease increased with total epifauna abundances. Furthermore, these relationships differed among taxa; snail (Lacuna spp.) abundance had the strongest (positive) relationship with disease. Disease also increased with abundance of idoteid isopods but was not clearly related to abundance of ampithoid amphipods. This field study across 23ยบ of latitude suggests a prominent role for inconspicuous invertebrates in facilitating disease outbreaks with potentially large impacts on coastal seagrass ecosystems. 

**Repository Description:** This repository contains the data and code to support the analysis and data visualization in the paper.
* data: The input folder contains files with data from annual eelgrass surveys conducted at intertidal sites along the west coast of North America, as well as files containing mean temperatures and temperature anomalies measured at those same sites available from the MUR and G1SST records compiled by NASA. These input datasets are collated in the code file 01_data_prep.R into output datasets that are appropriately formatted for analyses and visualization. More details on the datasets are available in the 'data_dictionary_metadata' file. 
* code: This folder contains code files for both data analysis and visualization.
* figures: This folder contains the low-resolution copies of data figures from the paper and supplemntal material. 